[Music.]
Hello and welcome to Veterans of the Valley.
I'm Tom Turbiville.
This week and next week, you will hear just part of the incredible story of service of 1st Sergeant Jeffrey Bailey O'Brien, a 20-year Army veteran who served overseas in Germany twice in Korea and two tours of Vietnam, first with the 18th Army of Vietnam Infantry and later with the 12th Cav.
He was wounded during each Vietnam deployment, earning two Purple Hearts and the Silver Star, among many other awards and medals.
Between his Vietnam tours, he served on the streets of Southside Chicago, helping to defuse the devastating riots in the days following the April 4th, 1968 assassination of Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.
He also served three years at Fort Greeley, Alaska, on the edge of the Arctic Circle.
As you can imagine, his is a remarkable story of service.
And we welcome Jeffrey Bailey to Veterans of the Valley.
Jeffrey, thank you for being with us.
It's an honor to know you and to talk to you.
Let's get you into the service.
I know you grew up in Benchley just down the road.
You graduated from high school in Hearn in 1951 and entered the service in December of 1952, went to Fort Hood for your basic.
And first overseas deployment was Germany.
Talk about that because you told me that Germany was a good place for the American soldier to be at this time because it was only eight years removed from World War II.
Talk about that.
Oh, that's correct.
It was a wonderful place to be.
The beginning of a 20-year adventure for me.
Right.
Most of it enjoyable.
All of it a learning exercise.
Exactly.
I grew up in Benchley, as you indicated, on a family farm there.
Went to high school, graduated from Blackshire High School.
In Germany, going to Germany, what you realize is that the emphasis in high school was placed on European history.
So you know about the power of London and the nightlife of Paris and the artistry and so forth.
So you're anxious to see these things that you have studied and read about.
And that made it an exciting thing, first of all.
You get to live the experience you've been studying.
But it was a great time to be there for several reasons.
Number one was kind of economic, I think.
The ratio of marks per dollar was somewhere around 12 to 15 at that time.
So you could buy much more goods and services with your money.
But...
It was fairly close to World War II within the decade of the end of World War II.
And it was amazing to see the devastation that is caused by war.
And the German cities, manufacturing facilities were all like totally destroyed.
And it was my first time of seeing the female population of any country
physically work doing a man's work.
Rebuilding of the streets and infrastructure was did 80% of it by female.
The building of the streets, as an example, the old streets primarily were of cobblestone, like six by six square.
And they have women out there manhandling these cobblestone and laying them in place and physically doing the work.
It was amazing.
There were other advantages.
As you know, we have just negotiated a status of force agreement with the Iraqis.
We hadn't reached that point yet in Germany.
At that time, the Germans were not allowed to be armed.
They couldn't handle weapons.
They couldn't arrest you.
You were held accountable for your actions, but not by the German courts, by the military.
So...
It was kind of nice being there at that time.
And indeed, you were an occupational force in Germany.
We were an occupation army.
That was your job.
And you personally, you were heavy weapons infantry, mortar platoon.
Mortar platoon, mortars.
I started out on the 81 mortars initially and graduated to the four deuces, which is the biggest mortar that the army had.
which is equivalent to 105 millimeter howitzer in diameter and destruction just doesn't have quite the range.
Right.
And of course the 1st Infantry had been in Germany since 1941.
They had been since the beginning of the U.S.
involvement in the war.
The 1st Division into Germany.
Right.
And the storied history you wouldn't believe.
Just listening, if you're exposed to the history of the 1st Infantry Division, you become a supporter of them.
Right.
They have the largest graveyards in France, as an example.
They like to be first in everything.
And they were first in death, combat death.
The first across the Rhine River Infantry Division, the first to reach the Siegfried Line, the first to do all of these things.
When I got there,
The mission is impressed upon you in such a fashion that you don't forget it because the mission of the 1st Infantry Division at that time was to hold a line for one hour.
That hour was to allow evacuation of civilians.
After that, you were to make your way on your own back south of the Rhine River.
You left Germany, went back to the States, Fort Riley.
Your enlistment was up in 1956.
You got out, you re-enlisted, first armor, Fort Polk, Louisiana.
But I want to talk about your next really significant deployment, and that was to Alaska, where you went to Fort Greeley as part of the Continental Army Command.
Talk about what your duties were there.
You tested everything for cold weather, right?
Yes.
I was with the Arctic Test Board.
We came on the CONOC Command, which is Continental Army Command.
So that puts you up there on a fairly short list, a chain of command between you and the Chief of Staff of the Army.
Mm-hmm.
Headquarters was in, I believe, in Fort Monroe, Virginia at that time.
But my job specifically was the mortar test NCO.
I was in the mortar and test, mortar and chemical test section, and we tested all of the weapons for the mortars and the chemical weapons.
We did the cold weather test work on, as an example,
The present-day gas mask, I think they still use the one with the two cheeks.
Prior to that, it had been the old mask with one canister on the left cheek.
We tested the munition for the four-deuce mortar and the 81 mortar to give them increased range and more lethality.
We also...
We tested other equipment.
We helped because you have to have X number of people doing things.
We did work in conjunction with the quartermaster section on over white boots.
That's what we call them.
You didn't even put them on if it was above 20 below zero.
And they would keep your feet warm.
We did an over black boot that you wore if it was 20% higher.
That was exciting work.
And finally, we did the work on the special weapon, the battalion commander's atomic weapon.
The infantry battalion commander had accessibility to an atomic weapon.
It was called a David Crockett.
But we didn't test the warhead.
We only test the delivery system and haul around a warhead for
Just for cold weather treatment, we didn't physically test the weapons.
Right.
Spent three years in Alaska, so you went through a... Yes, you were going to add.
There was one other significant incident that went on in Alaska while I was there.
The Russians got to playing around and sent up their Sputnik, which I failed to mention to you the other day.
Now, that got us all going in high gear.
I'm old enough to remember that, as a matter of fact.
They put that Sputnik in orbit, and that put us on an alert, because a part of our alert procedures were...
When we have an alert, if anything happens, the test system kind of ceased to exist.
It became a second priority because our first mission was to man the due line.
The defense early warning system.
You were out there looking.
You were taking a close look at that bird going across.
That's right.
In Alaska for three years, so you spent a lot of summers and winters in Alaska.
So you got the full force of it all, right?
Got the full force of it.
Need to move on.
You came back.
You were at Fort Benning, U.S.
Army Instructor Training School from the summers of 62 to 65.
And then back to Germany again.
Quickly, what was your job the next time when you went back to Germany for one year?
I went back as a mortar David Crockett platoon sergeant controlling the same weapons that I had been teaching in Benin and doing test work on in Alaska.
There was one significant incident that occurred while I was at Benin.
We lost John F. Kennedy.
That got our heart pumping because everybody prepared to stage an invasion from mainland U.S.
along the Gulf Coast.
But we went back to Germany.
This time we went down in the folder gap the historic invasion route of everybody into Germany. That's where we spent time for a year until. As you said eyeball to eyeball with the Russians. With the Russians. They always seem to be there. They always seem to be there um
And then back to the United States, Fort Bragg Military Assistance Advisory School for 12 weeks, where the emphasis you said you knew where you were headed because the emphasis there was on physical conditioning and learning the Vietnamese language.
That's correct.
You knew that when you got your orders probably five months early or six months early.
They said, Vietnam, this is just a stop in transit to prepare you for that mission.
And we did the 12 weeks there.
And once again, the emphasis was on language and physical condition.
And you found that you pretty well needed them both.
10th Armored Vietnam, August of 1966 was the first time that you arrived in country.
Things were really heating up about then.
Talk about
your unit, what your duty was in Vietnam, and go ahead and lead us on to the incidents whereby you received your first Purple Heart.
I was assigned to the...
It's a funny thing.
I was assigned to what at the time was the 10th ARVN Division.
And in the Vietnamese lingo.
Right.
I said armored.
I meant armored.
No, no.
Right.
Yes.
But in the Vietnamese lingo, the number 10 is a low number.
Number one is the best with 10 being the worst.
In the 10th ARVN Division, Infantry Division, they changed the name to the 18th.
I see.
For that reason only.
I got you.
So, you know, it didn't get discredited.
Right.
It didn't
give you the wrong connotation.
But when I went in there initially, we were sitting in there at the base of Black Virgin Mountain, well, several miles away from it, and guarding this little village.
And what strikes you initially when you go in country is that the population has been removed from the countryside into the city because the war has caused this here.
Everything out there other than a village that you know is occupied is kind of a free fire zone.
We were sitting down here guarding this little village probably of about 5,000 people.
We ran patrols and whatnot out of that place until we had an incident up at another location because that location was down at the edge of the rubber plantation on Highway 1.
We had up at Vosu, we had a part of the infantry division, a battalion of it got overran to make the story short.
And we had to get out and go up there.
Now, as an advisor with an infantry battalion, you live and eat and live and die with those people.
That is your unit.
So we had to walk 75K a week.
It took us about three days, and we arrived up there and found that the unit had been totally decimated.
Out of 1,000 people, there was only 11 of them left to survive.
With the ARVNs, you had a four-man advisory team, two officers and two enlisted.
Only one man was left out of that four-man team, and there was an enlisted person who had suffered a chest wound, destroyed part of his lung, and he had been injured for three days laying in what amounts to your sewage ditch there.
But he survived.
And, of course, we were greeted with messages in the village posted on the bulletin board by the NVA unit that overran them and killed them all.
and said that fate awaited us.
Fortunately, it didn't occur, but in the attempt to make it occur, we got a desert in who was the regimental XO of that attacking unit, and he gave us the information that they were going to attack in about three days, gave us the total order of battle, everything, so we were prepared for them and kind of
took care of business.
Made short work of it.
And they posted notices on the village board that they would be back.
We owed them a debt and blood and all that.
You told me that they even produced a list with names on it, and your name was on the list.
That's right.
They had a list.
All of the advisors, there was only three of us at that time, two officers and myself, and all three of our names were on there in various Pierce Awards for your head.
Right.
Their next attack wasn't quite as bold as the last one.
Because on the first one, they just attacked in mass, which was kind of unusual for them.
But on the next one, they sit back and mortared us.
And that's where I received my Purple Heart first time was in a mortar attack.
Right.
This is about a month after the first attack.
About a month.
Yes.
And see, at Vosu, that was a village and it was occupied.
That's where they go to mark and post the propaganda list.
Vodot was like 4,000 kilometers away, and it was unoccupied.
We human beings living there.
We lost the senior advisor, a captain from Massachusetts, and we lost the junior officer advisor with a severe leg wound, and they gave me a...
a little present I guess I'll carry for the rest of my life.
I still retain some of the fragments.
You caught some shrapnel, right?
Oh, yes, yes, yes.
In my arm, in my hand, and in the right side of my body.
Right.
They removed all that on the right side of my body.
That I still carry is really in the palm of my hand.
In America, having the best doctors, he says, I can take it out, but you will...
I'll do more damage to the hand.
Leave it in there and you'll suffer no effects for it.
And that was in 1967.
And I haven't had a day's pain with it yet.
Periodically, about once every two or three years, the VA will x-ray it to see if it's moving because it's located right under those two veins right there.
And it's just kind of steady.
1967, you were 35 years old.
That would be right.
October.
Still a young man.
Yes, yes, yes.
Were you, and we didn't talk about this the other day, but being in that situation, being in the firefight, what were your thoughts?
World War II veterans tell me all the time their thoughts were just do your job, do your job and survive.
Is that what your thoughts were?
Were you scared?
No, you don't have time to get scared.
And that's basically what happens.
Your training kicks in and you take it from there.
And like you say, I was 35 years old.
The draft at that time was from 19 to 26, I believe.
And the difference is I have spent 10, 12 years in preparation for this moment.
So you just automatically, you believe so much in your training
And if you didn't want to be there, you wouldn't, of course, you had ample opportunities to get out.
So you just kind of go on automatic pilot, like the pilot that landed that plane in the Hudson River the other day.
He didn't do a lot of thinking.
He just kind of automatically do your job.
And you will find that at times, you will actually...
In the middle of a fight, you'll sometimes think, now what the hell am I doing here and why am I not afraid?
Because your training takes over.
You don't do stupid things.
You don't run standing straight up if they're shooting at you, but you really don't get time to be afraid.
Now, when it's all over 30 minutes later and you're sitting down smoking your first cigarette, you might not be able to stand back up.
It's a great analogy about the pilot landing in the Hudson.
Let's look at some pictures here real quick of some of the things that you've talked about and some pictures of the young soldier, Jeffrey Bailey.
When was that taken?
That would have been in early 1967, I believe.
Okay, so that would have been after your first tour.
It was in between tours.
Yeah, before your second tour.
It was even before... Before Chicago.
Before Chicago.
Right, which we'll be talking about next show.
Okay, let's move on.
That one is much earlier.
That's going to be in the late 50s.
It came out of Alaska in 59, so it's going to be in 59 or 60.
You had received expert marksman?
That's right.
Citations?
Now talk about this.
This was during a training exercise, and that's you in the buggy there.
This was just sort of a training exercise, is that right?
That's a training day.
That's an organizational day.
It's like the birthday of the organizations.
really a training day where everybody takes off because after this, there's the beer and the food.
And that's in Fort Hood, Texas.
And that's a first sergeant's race.
See, all of the first sergeants are being pulled by three people from their unit.
Okay.
So this wasn't training.
This was field day, huh?
This is an athletic event day.
I see.
Okay.
And we won the race, by the way.
And you were serious about it because this next one shows that you're...
you're back there like you're riding a bucking bronco and there you got your horses there in front of you. And they were good. Yeah. That particular day we don't have any pictures of it but we had the staff, the battalion staff, battalion commander xo, and one two three four, the staff officer pulling against the first sergeant. Right. And selected platoon sergeant on a rope pull while you drag the other through the mud pit.
We drove those officers right through the mud.
Oh, my goodness.
Let's go.
We got one more picture.
You had talked about the Black Virgin Mountain.
knew it by then, the Black Virgin Mountain.
I found this picture on the internet of the Black Virgin Mountain.
Talk about what we're looking at there.
Well, it speaks for itself, except for one thing.
The very top of it was secured by the Army Security Agency.
And this is always one of our secret intelligence gathering people.
They listen to all of the enemy traffic and electronic eavesdropping outfits.
mostly, so far as I know.
But they occupied the top of the mountain with their security.
The middle part of the mountain was occupied by the enemy forces, and the bottom part was occupied by American forces.
So what are we looking at there at the base of the mountain right there in front?
That's a base camp.
I'm not sure who it is.
Like I say, we were like maybe 15, 20 miles away from it.
Right, right.
But on top of that mountain, you could see for a long way because you're talking about a mountain just raising up in the middle of the flat land.
That's exactly right.
Because actually, see, you're getting down toward the delta, toward the flat rice growing country down in there.
And if there's a military advantage in holding the high ground, they've got it.
They have got it.
Indeed.
You said that sort of a unique part of your service was that you served in every active armored division in your 20 years of service.
Talk about that.
Every active armored division.
First armored division, Old Ironside.
The second armored division, Hell on Wheels.
The third armored division, Spearhead Division.
And I don't know what the 4th Army Division's motto was.
I simply don't know.
I don't know if they had one.
But I served all four of them.
And then I never got hired in one in a numerical order in any other division.
1st Infantry Division, 1st Care Division.
4th Army Division and 3 preceding.
But, and every one of those Army Division, like I said, has a slogan.
The first arm at Old Ironside was Patton's nickname.
The Hell on Wheels thing was another one of his gimmicks.
Spearhead Division was Eisenhower's thing because he liked to spearhead his attacks with the armor of the Spearhead Division.
of the 3rd Armored Division.
Exactly.
When you left Vietnam after your first tour, did you have a feeling that you would be back?
I really didn't at that time, not that I recall, because we were talking about getting out of there in 1967.
Right.
And we had been in there for a number of years then, back 64, 65.
But I figured that there was always that chance.
And I wasn't about to volunteer to go back.
My wife will not believe that I didn't volunteer to go to Vietnam the first time.
Well, I did, but they refused that and sent me to Germany.
I didn't volunteer the second time.
They just said, he wanted to go then, we'll send him now.
You're...
You and your wife have been married for some 53 years now.
53 years.
She's been along for the ride.
She's been along for it.
And a military wife, especially one that sees her husband go off to Vietnam twice, takes a special person.
It does.
And you have to have a lot of respect for these people.
And they demand it and they get it because, first of all, if you're out of their life,
as the primary breadwinner or the controlling force, you're the head of the family.
for a year and they get along just fine without your supervision, authority or cooperation.
You have to kind of do some adjustments when you get back.
Right.
Next week we're going to talk about two other aspects of your service.
Your service as we mentioned in the streets of Southside Chicago and we're going to talk about your second tour of Vietnam and what you've been doing since 1973 when you retired from the military.
But you came back after your first tour of Vietnam and then back to Fort Hood, is that right?
Back to Fort Hood.
I came back to Fort Hood once again, joined the 1st Army Division, an old unit I'd been in before.
Out of four trips to Fort Hood and one in Louisiana with the 1st Army Division,
I only served in two units, one with the 634th Armored Infantry Battalion.
All the rest of them was with this one infantry battalion.
Once or twice the same company.
So it was like my home away from home.
You told me you had five tours with the 1st Armored Division.
That's right.
Four of them at Hood.
You got to know them well.
Got to know them.
I know Fort Hood as well as particularly the hills and hollers, the creeks and streams, the training areas.
There's not a lot you don't know, I have a feeling.
We're going to learn more of it next week.
Thanks.
We'll be back next week with you.
Thank you.
We have taken First Sergeant Bailey's military career now to Germany, Alaska, Korea, and the first tour of Vietnam, still to cover his some six years, including the streets of Chicago, and back to Vietnam where he earned the Silver Star.
So join us next week for the rest of this remarkable story of service.
I'm Tom Turbeville.
Join First Sergeant Jeffrey Bailey and me next week on Veterans of the Valley.
[Music.]
[Silence.]